Rfc for implicit inclusion of checked header files. (#998)
microsoft/checkedc-clang: clang/docs/checkedc/rfc/Include-Checked-Hdrs.md

       required to the order in which include directories are searched. 5) It
       is convenient for automation.

     - **Cons**: 1) In some cases integration with the build system will be more
       involved if the above flag needs to be passed to the compilation of most
       source files and avoided for a few source files that may want to directly
       include system header files in order to avoid Checked-C-specific
       declarations. 2) It is difficult to accomodate clang-specific
       declarations.

## Proposed Solution:

The proposed solution is as follows:
  - We will implicitly include checked header files by default and provide the 
    compilation flag NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS to opt out of the implicit
    inclusion.
  - For header files that do not have clang-specific declarations, but have
    Checked-C-specific declarations (there are 13 such header files at present),
    we will do the following:
      - For each system header file, say `foo.h`, that does not have
        clang-specific declarations but has Checked-C-specific declarations, we
        will add a new file also called `foo.h` that will contain the following:

>             #if !defined __checkedc || defined NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS
>             #include_next <foo.h>
>             #else
>             #include <foo_checked.h>
>             #endif

Reviewer: I realize this can be substantially simplified if you don't mind some header files being read multiple times.  They probably are or have to be guarded anyway, so the only cost I see is performance, unless there is a concern about a header file indirectly including itself recursively even if the recursion is immediately stopped by a guard.
```suggestion
            #include_next <foo.h>
            #if defined __checkedc && !defined NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS
            #include <foo_checked.h>
            #endif
```

Author: I understand that this suggestion has the advantage of a uniform approach for all header files but it relies on guard flags to avoid recursion. In order to keep the solution simple and maintainable, we do prefer to avoid a header file including itself recursively without relying on guard flags.
Additionally, in the implementation, there are more flags entering into the fray in order to handle the absence of some posix header files like `unistd.h`, `arpa/inet.h` and `sys/socket.h` in the Windows environment. This makes it even more necessary to keep the solution simple and also comprehensible.

Reviewer: When I think about this now, I think I got a little carried away with my proposal and you were right to decline it.  The resulting code looks simpler on the surface, but it's significantly more complicated to verify that it works correctly.

FWIW, an alternative way to achieve a uniform approach is to have each header `foo.h` with no Clang-specific declarations use your existing design for headers with Clang-specific declarations, effectively as if Clang already had a `foo.h` containing nothing but `#include_next <foo.h>` followed by an empty set of Clang-specific declarations.  You could decide whether the resulting short, boilerplate `foo.h` goes in the `checkedc-clang` or `checkedc` repository; the former would achieve total uniformity.  But this would increase the number of header files you have to maintain by about 50% (in addition to `foo.h` and `foo_checked.h`, you would have `foo_checked_internal.h`) for minimal practical benefit, so I imagine it's not worth it.  (The only practical benefit I see is that if the user had some problem with the system `foo.h` but had another way to get the plain-C declarations they want, they could then get the Checked C declarations by including `foo_checked_internal.h` with no risk of pulling in the system `foo.h`.  But I think this would be very unusual, and the user could use the hacky workaround of manually defining the header guard for `foo.h` before including `foo_checked.h`.)

Author: Yes, we did earlier consider having the uniform approach of creating `*_checked_internal.h` for all header files that have Checked-C-specific declarations. At present, there are 14 such header files of which `inttypes.h` is the only file with clang-specific declarations. We decided not to create `*_checked_internal.h` for all because 13 of these files will be redundant at present.
If a user wants custom plain-C declarations and also Checked C declarations for, say, `foo.h`, under the present system he/she can 1) include either `foo.h` (for implicit inclusion) or `foo_checked.h` (for explicit inclusion) and 2) add `-nostdlibinc` and the include directory containing custom plain-C declarations on the compilation command line.

>       - The file `foo_checked.h` will contain `#include_next <foo.h>` and the

Reviewer: You could change the `#include_next <foo.h>` to `#include <foo.h>` (making it consistent with the case where Clang-specific declarations are present) if you add a guard to `foo.h` to avoid direct recursion between the two files.  (Otherwise, `foo.h` does not _need_ a guard because all it does is include two other files that presumably have their own guards.  But if it's considered best practice for `foo.h` to have a guard anyway, then you could adopt this suggestion.)

        Checked-C-specific declarations.

  - For a system header file that contains clang-specific declarations and also
    Checked-C-specific declarations (there is one such header file at present),
    we will do the following:
      - Let `bar.h` be such a header file. Then there already 
        exists a file called `bar.h` in the `clang/lib/Headers` directory,
        which contains clang-specific declarations in the following format:

            #include_next <bar.h>
            <currently existing clang-specific declarations>

        At the end of this pre-existing `bar.h`, we will add the following:

            #if defined __checkedc && !defined NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS

>             #include <bar_checked_internal.h>

Reviewer: Based on the same idea as my previous comment, this could be changed to just:
```suggestion
            #include <bar_checked.h>
```
Then the format of `bar.h` would be exactly the same as in the case of no Clang-specific declarations, except for the presence of the declarations between the `#include_next <bar.h>` and the Checked-C-specific block at the bottom.

            #endif

>       - All the Checked-C-specific declarations (that are currently present in
>         `bar_checked.h`) will be moved to `bar_checked_internal.h`. The file
>         `bar_checked.h` will be modified to contain just the following:
> 
>             #include <bar.h>
>             #include <bar_checked_internal.h>

Reviewer: And then:
```suggestion
      - The file `bar_checked.h` will contain `#include <bar.h>` and the
        Checked-C-specific declarations.
```

# Explicit and Implicit Inclusion of Checked Header Files
Author: Sulekha Kulkarni, Approver: David Tarditi, Date Approved:

# OARP

| Role          | Person |
|-------------------|---------------|
| Owner         | Sulekha Kulkarni  |
| Approver      | David Tarditi     |
| Reviewers     | Joseph Lloyd, Mandeep Grang, Katherine Kjeer |
| Reviewers     | Mike Hicks and other folks at CCI |

## Goal
The goal of this document is to record the design considerations for allowing
programs to include the checked counterparts of system header files either
explicitly or implicitly during the conversion of these programs to Checked C.

## Problem Summary
The existing approach for including checked header files, which is to explicitly
replace an included header file with its checked counterpart, is inconvenient

> for automation by 3C. So we need a way to implicitly include checked header

Reviewer 2: I would talk about this in more general terms.  3C is representative of an approach to converting files.  It is inconvenient for adoption of Checked C to have to alter include files throughout a project.

Author: Thank you for your review! I have addressed all the review comments and made the requisite changes to the doc.

files.

## Conditions that a Solution must Satisfy

>  - The solution must not violate the "opt-in" philosophy that we advocate for

Reviewer 2: The proposed solution isn't opt-in, though.

 always remain a viable alternative.
 - It should be possible to directly include certain system header files and
 bypass the inclusion of their checked counterparts in order to support custom
 build environments.
 - The order in which the compiler driver searches the include paths must remain
 unaltered.
 - The solution must be able to accommodate any clang-specific declarations in
 system header files, if present (Ex.: inttypes.h).
 - The Checked-C-specific declarations must live in checkedc repository.

## Details of the Existing Approach 
 - The existing approach supports only the explicit inclusion of checked header
 files.
 - An installed Checked C compiler places the checked counterparts of system
 header files like `stdio_checked.h` in the directory
 `$INSTALL_DIR/lib/clang/<VERSION>/include`, which clang searches before it
 looks in system include directories. Note that there is no alteration of the
 include search path to accommodate any include files related to Checked C.
 - If a checked header file like `stdio_checked.h` is included in a program,
 clang picks it up from the above location.

## Solution Space

>  - Solution 1: Proposed by CCI

Reviewer 2: Probably better to give this a more general name, not "proposed by CCI".

          Infinite recursion is avoided because of `#include_next`.
        - If a program includes `foo_checked.h` current behavior will prevail.
          The above flag has no effect on the explicit inclusion of checked
          header files.

     - **Pros**: 1) It satisfies the "opt-in" philosophy. 2) It is convenient
       for automation. 3) It provides fine-grained control to directly include a
       system header file. 4) The existing approach of explicit inclusion is
       supported. 5) In most cases integration with the build system is easy:
       the flag `-DIMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS` is passed to the compilation
       of all source files through the `CFLAGS` variable.

     - **Cons**: 1) In some cases integration with the build system will be more
       involved if the above flag needs to be passed to the compilation of most
       source files and avoided for a few source files that may want to directly
       include system header files in order to avoid Checked-C-specific
       declarations. 2) It is difficult to accomodate clang-specific
       declarations.

## Proposed Solution:

The proposed solution is as follows:

>   - It is a hybrid solution based on ideas in Solutions 3 and 1 that

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't t his be classified as another possible solution?  It is a little confusing for the proposed solution to be described as a hybrid of other solutions.

    make implicit inclusion of checked header files as default.
  - We primarily adopt Solution 3 for header files that do not have
    clang-specific declarations, but have Checked-C-specific declarations (there
    are 13 such header files at present). To implicitly include checked headers
    by default, the compilation flag (as proposed in Solution 3) now gives a way
    to **opt out** of implicit inclusion. Accordingly, it is renamed to
    NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS.
      - For each system header file, say `foo.h`, that does not have
        clang-specific declarations but has Checked-C-specific declarations, we
        will add a new file also called `foo.h` that will contain the following:

            #ifdef NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS
            #include_next <foo.h>
            #else
            #include <foo_checked.h>
            #endif

      - The file `foo_checked.h` will contain `#include_next <foo.h>` and the
        Checked-C-specific declarations.

  - For a system header file that contains clang-specific declarations and also
    Checked-C-specific declarations (there is one such header file at present),

>     we will do the following:

Reviewer: If you're willing to change the default include path in the driver to add a Checked-C-specific include directory (say `lib/clang/VERSION/include-checkedc`) before the main one (`lib/clang/VERSION/include`), then you won't need to do this.  You can use the solution in the previous bullet point for all Checked C headers, and the `#include_next <foo.h>` will automatically pick up either the system header or the Clang header (in which the `#include_next <foo.h>` would then include the system header) as appropriate.  This would also cleanly separate the Checked C headers from the Clang headers in different subdirectories of the installation directory, making it clearer for users during troubleshooting.

Author: We have decided not to change the default include path in the driver at present.

      - Let `bar.h` be such a header file. Then there already 
        exists a file called `bar.h` in the `clang/lib/Headers` directory,
        which contains clang-specific declarations in the following format:

            #include_next <bar.h>
            <currently existing clang-specific declarations>

        At the end of this pre-existing `bar.h`, we will add the following:

            #ifndef NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS
            #include <bar_checked_internal.h>
            #endif

      - All the Checked-C-specific declarations (that are currently present in
        `bar_checked.h`) will be moved to `bar_checked_internal.h`. The file
        `bar_checked.h` will be modified to contain just the following:

>             // Force the inclusion of Checked-C-specific declarations
>             #undef NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS
>             #include <bar.h>   

Reviewer: If you do keep this approach rather than taking my suggestion above, might the following be safer?
```suggestion
            #include <bar.h>
            #include <bar_checked_internal.h>
```
`bar_checked_internal.h` might get scanned twice, so it would need a header guard and there might be a slight performance cost, but it would make it possible for a user to set `NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS` for one `#include <foo.h>` directive in a translation unit without the risk of an `#include <bar_checked.h>` earlier in the translation unit clobbering `NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS` (if that is a scenario you care about).

Author: @mattmccutchen-cci Thank you for your suggestion - you are right! I have incorporated it in the latest commit.

>             #include <bar.h>   

Reviewer 2: This approach of a slight alteration to the clang-specific header file looks good to me.

explicitly or implicitly during the conversion of these programs to Checked C.

## Problem Summary
The current approach for including checked header files, which is to explicitly
replace an included header file with its checked counterpart, is inconvenient
for adoption to Checked C - all the system header files included in a project
need to be altered. So we need a way to implicitly include checked header
files.

## Conditions that a Solution must Satisfy
 - The solution must provide users an option to either opt into the implicit
 inclusion of checked header files, or opt out of it if checked header files
 are implicitly included by default. This flexibility is required to support
 custom build environments.
 - The solution must be easy to integrate into an existing build system.
 - The current approach of explicitly including checked header files must
 always remain a viable alternative.
 - The order in which the compiler driver searches the include paths must remain
 unaltered.
 - The solution must be able to accommodate any clang-specific declarations in
 system header files, if present (Ex.: inttypes.h).

>  - The Checked-C-specific declarations must live in the checkedc repository.

Reviewer 3: `Checked-C-specific` --> `Checked C-specific`

Author: Thank you for your review! I feel that `Checked-C-specific` is a bit more clear - so I have retained the same.

 clang picks it up from the above location.

## Solution Space
 - Solution 1:
     - Let `foo.h` be a system header file with a checked counterpart called
     `foo_checked.h`. We add a new file, also called `foo.h`, in the same
     directory that contains `foo_checked.h`. This new `foo.h` should contain

>      `#include_next <foo.h>` plus all the Checked-C-specific declarations

Reviewer 3: `Checked-C-specific` --> `Checked C-specific`

          will also be picked up.
          - If the program includes `foo_checked.h`, the line `#include <foo.h>`
          in `foo_checked.h` will initiate the same process as above.
     - **Pros**: 1) The current approach of explicit inclusion is supported.
       2) No changes are required to the build system. 3) No changes are
       required to the order in which the include directories are searched.
       4) It is convenient for automation.
     - **Cons**: 1) The solution does not provide a way to opt out of including
       checked headers. 2) While it is easy to accommodate clang-specific

>        declarations in system header files (Checked-C-specific declarations can

Reviewer 3: `Checked-C-specific` --> `Checked C-specific`

       be added after the clang-specific declarations), this solution will
       require some Checked-C-specific declarations to be part of checkedc-clang
       repository.

 - Solution 2:
     - Have a different compiler driver to provide the facility for implicit
       inclusion of header files.
     - **Pros**: 1) The solution provides the option to opt into implicitly
       including checked header files. 2) The existing approach of explicit
       inclusion is supported. 3) In most cases integration into a build system
       will be easy: the `CC` variable can be redefined appropriately. 4) It is
       convenient for automation.
     - **Cons**: 1) It is a very heavy-weight solution. 2) In some cases
       integrating with a build system will be more involved when both the
       drivers are needed to compile the sources. This may happen in a scenario
       where most source files want implicit inclusion but a few source files
       want explicit inclusion because they want to directly include some system

>        header files in order to avoid Checked-C-specific declarations.

Reviewer 3: `Checked-C-specific` --> `Checked C-specific`

## Proposed Solution:

The proposed solution is as follows:
  - We will implicitly include checked header files by default and provide the 
    compilation flag NO_IMPLICIT_INCLUDE_CHECKED_HDRS to opt out of the implicit
    inclusion.
  - For header files that do not have clang-specific declarations, but have

>     Checked-C-specific declarations (there are 13 such header files at present),

Reviewer 3: `Checked-C-specific` --> `Checked C-specific`
